so there's this thing called the law of
unintended consequences I thought it was
just like a saying but it actually
exists I guess there's like academic
papers about it and I'm a designer I
don't like unintended consequences
people hire me because they have
consequences that they really intend and
what they intend is for me to help them
achieve those consequences so I live in
fear about intended consequences and so
this is a story about consequences
intended and unintended I got called by
an organization called Robin Hood to do
a favor for them Robin Hood is based in
New York a wonderful philanthropic
organization that does what it says in
the name they take from risk people give
it to poor people in this case what they
wanted to benefit was the New York City
school system a huge enterprise that
educates more than a million students at
a time
and in buildings that are like this one
old buildings big buildings drafty
buildings sometimes buildings that are
in disrepair certainly buildings that
could use a renovation Robin said that's
ambition to improve these buildings in
some way but what they realized was to
fix the buildings would be too expensive
and impractical so instead they tried to
figure out what one room they could go
into in each of these buildings as many
buildings as they could and fix that one
buildings but fix that one room so that
they could improve the lives of the
children inside as they were studying
and what they came up with was the
school library and they came up with
this idea called the library initiative
all the students one time or another
have to pass through the library that's
where the books are that's where the
heart and soul of the school is so let's
fix these libraries so they did this
wonderful thing where they brought in
first 10 then 20 then more architects
each one of whom was assigned a library
to rethink what a library was they
trained special librarians so they
started this mighty enterprise to reform
public schools by improving these
libraries then they called me up and
they said did you
make a little contribution I said sure
what do you want me to do and they said
well we want you to be the graphic
designer in charge of the whole thing
and so I thought I know what that means
that means that I get to design a logo I
know how to design that I design logos
that's what people come to me for so
okay let's design a logo for this thing
easy to do actually compare with
architecture and being a librarian just
do a logo make a contribution and then
you're out and you feel really good
about yourself I'm a great guy and I
would like to feel good about myself
when I do these favors so I thought well
let's over deliver I'm going to give you
three logos all based on this one idea
so you have three options pick any of
the three they're all great I said so
the basic idea was these would be new
school libraries for New York schools
and so the idea is that it's a new thing
a new idea that needs a new name what I
wanted to do is dispel the idea that
these were musty old libraries the kind
of places that everyone is bored with
you know not your grandparents library
don't worry about that at all this is
going to be this new exciting thing not
a boring library so option number one so
instead of think of as a library think
of it as a place where it is like a do
talk do make loud noises right so no
shushing is like a shush free zone we're
gonna hold the reading room goes off to
number one okay obviously number two
option number two option number two was
wait for it oh I'm Beach it out I'm
getting my book from the off down meet
you after school down at Owl I like that
right now what is our stamp oh well
it could be one world library or it
could be open wonder learn or it could
be and I you know I fear librarians
could figure out other things it could
be because I know about work so other
things right and then look at this it's
like the eye of the owl this is
irresistible in my opinion but there's
even another idea obscene number three
option number three was based actually
on language it's the idea that read is
the past tense of read and the both
spell the same way so why don't we call
this place the red zone
I'm just the red zone are you read get
read I'm well-read and so I really love
this idea and I somehow was not focused
on the idea that librarians as a class
are sort of interested in spelling and
so um
but I think sometimes cleverness is more
important than spelling and I thought
this would be one of those instances so
usually when I make these presentations
I say there's just one question and the
question should be how can I thank you
Mike but in this case the question was
more like um are you kidding
because they said the premise of all
this work was that kids were bored with
old libraries musty old libraries they
were tired of them and instead they said
these kids have never really seen a
library the school libraries in these
schools are really so dilapidated if
they're there at all that they haven't
bored anyone you know they haven't even
been there to bore anyone at all so the
idea was just forget about giving it a
new name just call it one last try a
library right okay so but I thought okay
give a little exclamation point then
this is because I'm clever move that
into the eye make it read and there you
have it the library initiative right so
I thought
mission accomplished there's your logo
so what's interesting about this logo an
unintended consequence was that it
turned out that they didn't really even
need my design because you could type it
in any font you could write it by hand
and when they started sending emails
around they just would kind of use shift
and want and they get their own logo
just right out of the thing so and I
thought well that's fine you know
everyone feel free to use that logo and
then I embarked on the real rollout of
this thing would be working with every
one of the architects to put this logo
on the front door of their own library
right so here's a been rollout so
basically I work with different
architects who now in person was Robin
Hood was my client now these architects
for my client I say here's your logo put
it on the door here's your logo put it
on both doors there's your logo put it
up this right who's all over repeated
all over bottom the top right so
everything's going swimmingly I just was
saying here's your logo here's your logo
here's your logo
then I got a call from one of the
architects a guy named Richard Lewis and
Richard Lewis says hey I've got a
problem you're the graphics guy right
can you solve em I said ok sure he said
the problem is that there's a space
between the shelf and the ceiling so
there's something an architectural issue
to me not a graphic design issue some go
on
and Richard says well the top shelf has
to be low enough for the kid to reship
and I'm a big old building and the
ceilings are really high so actually
I've got all this space up there and I
need something like a mural and I'm like
whoa you know I'm a I'm a logo designer
I'm not Diego Rivera or something you
know I'm not a muralist so he said but
you know anything of anything so I said
okay arm what if we just took pictures
of the kids in the school and just put
them around the top of the thing and
maybe that could work and my wife is a
photographer and I said Dorothy there's
no budget can you come to this school in
East New York take these pictures and
she did and if you go in Richards
library which is one of the first that
opened it has his glorious frieze of
like the heroes of the school over sighs
looking down into the little dollhouse
of the real library right the kids were
great hand selected by the principals
and the librarian you know it just kind
of created this heroic atmosphere in
this library that's very dignified
setting below and the joy of the
children above right so naturally all
the other librarians in the other school
see this and they said well we want
murals too and I'm like okay so then I
think well you can't be the same ural
every time so Dorothy did another one
and then she did another one but then we
needed more help so I called an
illustrator I knew named Lynn Pauley and
Lynn do these beautiful paintings of the
kids then we I call the guy named
Charles Wilton it applies to automatic
design he's amazing collages we had on
Raphael ascared do these great
silhouettes he would work with the kids
ask me for words and then based on those
prompts come up with this little
delirious kind of constellation of
silhouettes of things that are in books
peter Arkell interviewed the kids and
had them talk about their favorite books
and he put their testimony as a freeze
up their seven Sagmeister work with Yuko
Shimizu and they did this amazing manga
style statement everyone who is honest
is interesting that goes all the way
around Christoph Neiman brilliant
illustrator did a whole series of things
where he embedded books into the bases
and characters and images and places
that you find in the books and then even
Myra calman did this amazing cryptic
installation of objects and words
but kind of go all around and will
fascinate students you know for as long
as is up there so this is really
satisfying basically my role here was
reading you know a series of dimensions
to these artists and I'd say you know
three feet by 15 feet whatever you want
let me know if you have any trouble with
it and they would don't install a since
it just was the greatest thing um but
the greatest thing actually was
everyone's when I get like an invitation
male made of construction paper and
would say you are invited to the opening
of our new library so you go to the
library say you're a PS 10 and you go
inside there be balloons there'd be a
student ambassador there be like
speeches that were read poetry that was
written specifically for the opening on
dignitaries would present people with
certificates in the holder was just a
delirious fun party so I love doing
these things I would stand there dress
like this obviously not belonging and
someone say what are you doing here
mister and I'd say well you know I'm
part of the team that designed this
place and they say you do these shelves
and I said no so he took the pictures up
above no and they said well what did you
do I said well you know when you came in
to sign over the door they said the sign
that says library okay
yeah I did that and then they sort of
like okay yeah some nice work of didn't
get it um so uh it was so satisfying
going to these little openings despite
the fact that I was kind of largely
ignored or humiliated but it was it was
actually fun on the opening so I decided
that I wanted to kind of get the people
in my office who were working these
projects get the illustration but the
ogress would collaborate with us and I
said why don't we just rent a van and
drive around the five boroughs of New
York and see how many we could hit at
one time and eventually they're going to
60 of these libraries so we sort of
probably got to see maybe half a dozen
in one long day
and the best thing of all was meeting
these librarians who kind of were
running these you know took possession
of these places like their private stage
upon which they were invited to kind of
mesmerizer students and bring the books
to life and it was just this really
exciting experience for all of us
actually see these things in action and
so we spent a long day doing this and we
were in the very last library it was
still winter because it got dark early
and the librarian said
close down so I was really nice having
you here hey wait a second do you want
to see how I turn out the lights okay
and she said I have this special way
that I do it and then she showed me it's
what she did what she kind of turned out
every light one by one by one by one and
the last light she left on was the light
illuminating the kids faces and she said
that's the last light I turn out every
night because I like to remind myself
why I come to work so when I started
this whole thing remember it was just
about designing that logo and being
clever come up with a new name the
unintended consequence here which I
would like to take credit for I like to
think I can think through the experience
to that extent but I can't I was just
focused on a foot ahead of me an inch
ahead of me as far as I could reach with
my own hands instead way off in the
distance was a librarian who is going to
find the chain of consequences that we
had set in motion a source of
inspiration so that she in this case
could do her work really well 40,000
kids a year are affected by these
libraries they've been happening for
like more than ten years now so those
librarians have kind of turned on a
generation of children's books and so
it's been a thrill to find out that
sometimes unintended consequences are
the best consequences thank you very
much
[Applause]